docs: document the monitoring feature (#4710)
jina-ai/jina: docs/how-to/monitoring.md

(monitoring)=
# How to deploy and use the monitoring with Jina

```{caution} 
The monitoring feature is still in Beta and the API is not stable yet.
```

> Before starting showing you how to monitor a Flow, let have some context on the monitoring stack.

Reviewer: I dont know what the proper form is but I think `starting showing` is wrong

> Before starting showing you how to monitor a Flow, let have some context on the monitoring stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 a Flow, let's have some context on the monitoring stack.
```

> To leverage the {ref}`metrics <monitoring-flow>` that Jina expose we recommend to use the Prometheus/Grafana stack. In this setup, Jina will expose different {ref}`metrics endpoint <monitoring-flow>`  , Prometheus will then be in charge of scrapping these endpoints and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To leverage the {ref}`metrics <monitoring-flow>` that Jina exposes we recommend to use the Prometheus/Grafana stack. In this setup, Jina will expose different {ref}`metrics endpoint <monitoring-flow>`  , Prometheus will then be in charge of scraping these endpoints and
```

> to collect, aggregate and stored the different metrics. Prometheus will then allow external entity (like Grafana) to access these aggregated metrics via a query language [PromQL](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to collect, aggregate and store the different metrics. Prometheus will then allow external entities (like Grafana) to access these aggregated metrics via a query language [PromQL](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/).
```

> First, let's have some context on the monitoring stack that we will be using during this guide.
> To leverage the {ref}`metrics <monitoring-flow>` that Jina exposes we recommend to use the Prometheus/Grafana stack. In this setup, Jina will expose different {ref}`metrics endpoint <monitoring-flow>`  , Prometheus will then be in charge of scraping these endpoints and
> to collect, aggregate and store the different metrics. Prometheus will then allow external entities (like Grafana) to access these aggregated metrics via a query language [PromQL](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/).
> Then the role of Grafana here will be to allow users to visualize these metrics by creating dashboards.
> 
> ```{hint} 
> Jina supports exposing the metrics, you are in charge of installing and managed your Prometheus/Grafana instance
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, let's have some context on the monitoring stack that we will be using during this guide.
To leverage the {ref}`metrics <monitoring-flow>` that Jina exposes, we recommend to use the Prometheus/Grafana stack. In this setup, Jina will expose different {ref}`metrics endpoint <monitoring-flow>`, and Prometheus will then be in charge of scraping these endpoints, as well as
collecting, aggregating and storing the different metrics. Prometheus will then allow external entities (like Grafana) to access these aggregated metrics via the query language [PromQL](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/).
Then the role of Grafana here will be to allow users to visualize these metrics by creating dashboards.

```{hint} 
Jina supports exposing the metrics, you are in charge of installing and manageing your Prometheus/Grafana instances.
```
```

We will show you in this guide how to easily deploy the Prometheus/Grafana stack and used them to monitor a Flow.

## Use Prometheus and Grafana to monitor a Flow on Kubernetes

> One of the challenge of monitoring a Flow is to communicate to Prometheus the different metrics endpoints that the Flow expose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the challenge of monitoring a Flow is to communicate to Prometheus the different metrics endpoints that the Flow exposes.
```

> Fortunately the [Prometheus operator for kubernetes](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/user-guides/getting-started.md) makes all the process fairly easy because it can automatically discover new metrics endpoints to scrap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fortunately the [Prometheus operator for kubernetes](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/user-guides/getting-started.md) makes the process fairly easy, because it can automatically discover new metrics endpoints to scrap.
```

```{hint} 

> Deploying your Jina Flow on Kubernetes in the recommanded way to leverage the full potential of the monitoring feature because:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploying your Jina Flow on Kubernetes is the recommended way to leverage the full potential of the monitoring feature because:
```

> One of the challenge of monitoring a Flow is to communicate to Prometheus the different metrics endpoints that the Flow exposes.
> Fortunately the [Prometheus operator for kubernetes](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/user-guides/getting-started.md) makes the process fairly easy, because it can automatically discover new metrics endpoints to scrap.
> 
> ```{hint} 
> Deploying your Jina Flow on Kubernetes is the recommended way to leverage the full potential of the monitoring feature because:
> * The Prometheus operator can automatically discover new endpoint to scrap
> * You can extend your monitoring with the rich built-in Kubernetes metrics
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the challenges of monitoring a Flow is communicating its different metrics endpoints to Prometheus.
Fortunately, the [Prometheus operator for Kubernetes](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/user-guides/getting-started.md) makes the process fairly easy, because it can automatically discover new metrics endpoints to scrape.

```{hint} 
Deploying your Jina Flow on Kubernetes is the recommended way to leverage the full potential of the monitoring feature because:
* The Prometheus operator can automatically discover new endpoints to scrape
* You can extend your monitoring with the rich built-in Kubernetes metrics
```
```

> You need to have access to a kubernetes cluster to follow the rest of this guide.
> 
> You can easily have a kubernetes cluster on your local machine:
> - [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/)
> - [microk8s](https://microk8s.io/)
> 
> Or you can use a  managed kubernetes solution on the Cloud:
> - [Google Kubernetes Engine](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine),
> - [Amazon EKS](https://aws.amazon.com/eks),
> - [Azure Kubernetes Service](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/kubernetes-service),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You need to have access to a Kubernetes cluster to follow the rest of this guide.

You can easily have a Kubernetes cluster on your local machine:
- [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/)
- [microk8s](https://microk8s.io/)

Or you can use a  managed Kubernetes solution on the cloud:
- [Google Kubernetes Engine](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine),
- [Amazon EKS](https://aws.amazon.com/eks),
- [Azure Kubernetes Service](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/kubernetes-service),
```

### 1 - Deploying Prometheus and Grafana

Deploying Prometheus and Grafana on your k8s cluster is as easy as executing the following line:

```bash
helm install prometheus prometheus-community/kube-prometheus-stack --set prometheus.prometheusSpec.serviceMonitorSelectorNilUsesHelmValues=false
```
```{hint} 
setting the `serviceMonitorSelectorNilUsesHelmValues` to false allow the Prometheus Operator to discover metrics endpoint outside of the helm scope which will be needed to discover the Flow metrics endpoints.
```

### 2 - Deploying the Flow

Let's now deploy the Flow that we want to monitor

```python
from jina import Flow

f = Flow(monitoring=True).add(uses='jinahub+docker://SimpleIndexer')
f.to_k8s_yaml('config')
```

This will create a `config` folder containing the kubernetes yaml definition of the Flow.

```{seealso}
You can see indepth how to deploy a Flow on kubernetes {ref}`here <kubernetes>`
```

> Then deploy the Flow

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then deploy the Flow:
```

(monitoring)=
# How to deploy and use the monitoring with Jina

```{caution} 
The monitoring feature is still in Beta and the API is not stable yet.
```

> ## Use Prometheus and Grafana to monitor a Flow on Kubernetes

Reviewer 3: What about when using Docker Compose?

Author: Yeah you right I should add it as well

- [Amazon EKS](https://aws.amazon.com/eks),
- [Azure Kubernetes Service](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/kubernetes-service),

### 1 - Deploying Prometheus and Grafana

Deploying Prometheus and Grafana on your k8s cluster is as easy as executing the following line:

```bash
helm install prometheus prometheus-community/kube-prometheus-stack --set prometheus.prometheusSpec.serviceMonitorSelectorNilUsesHelmValues=false
```
```{hint} 
setting the `serviceMonitorSelectorNilUsesHelmValues` to false allows the Prometheus Operator to discover metrics endpoint outside of the helm scope which will be needed to discover the Flow metrics endpoints.
```
## 1 - Deploying the Flow and the monitoring stack

### Deploying on Kubernetes

Let's now deploy the Flow that we want to monitor:

```python
from jina import Flow

f = Flow(monitoring=True).add(uses='jinahub+docker://SimpleIndexer')
f.to_k8s_yaml('config')
```

This will create a `config` folder containing the Kubernetes YAML definition of the Flow.

```{seealso}
You can see in-depth how to deploy a Flow on kubernetes {ref}`here <kubernetes>`
```

Then deploy the Flow:

```bash
kubectl apply -R -f config
```

> Wait for a couple of minutes, and you should see that the pods are ready:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Wait for a couple of minutes, and you should see that the Pods are ready:
```

```bash
kubectl port-forward svc/prometheus-operated 9090:9090
```

```{figure} ../../.github/2.0/prometheus_target.png
:align: center
```
Before querying the gateway you need to port-forward
```bash
kubectl port-forward svc/gateway 8080:8080
```

Now to access Grafana just do

```bash
kb port-forward svc/prometheus-grafana 3000:80
```

and open `http://localhost:3000` in your browser

User is `admin`, password is `prom-operator`

You should see the Grafana home page.

### Deploying locally

Let's first deploy the Flow that we want to monitor:

````{tab} via Python code
```python
from jina import Flow

with Flow(monitoring=True, port_monitoring=8000, port=8080).add(
    uses='jinahub://SimpleIndexer', port_monitoring=9000
) as f:
    f.block()
```
````

````{tab} via docker-compose
```python
from jina import Flow

Flow(monitoring=True, port_monitoring=8000, port=8080).add(
    uses='jinahub+docker://SimpleIndexer', port_monitoring=9000
).to_docker_compose_yaml('config.yaml')
```
```bash
docker-compose -f config.yaml up
```
````

To monitor a flow locally you will need to install Prometheus and Grafana locally. The easiest way to do it is by using

> docker-compose.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Docker Compose
```

First clone the repo which contains the config file:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jina-ai/example-grafana-prometheus
cd example-grafana-prometheus/prometheus-grafana-local
```

then 

```bash
docker-compose up
```

You can access the Grafana dashboard at `http://localhost:3000`. the username is `admin` and the password `foobar`.

```{caution}
This example is working locally because Prometheus is configured so that it listens to ports 8000 and 9000. However,
in contrast with deploying on Kubernetes, you need to tell Prometheus which port to look at. You can change these
ports by modifying this [file](https://github.com/jina-ai/example-grafana-prometheus/blob/8baf519f7258da68cfe224775fc90537a749c305/prometheus-grafana-local/prometheus/prometheus.yml#L64)
```

## 2- Using Grafana to visualize metrics

> Once you can access the grafana nomepage then go to `Browse` then `import` and copy and paste the [JSON file](https://github.com/jina-ai/example-grafana-prometheus/blob/main/grafana-dashboards/flow.json) 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once you can access the Grafana nomepage then go to `Browse` then `import` and copy and paste the [JSON file](https://github.com/jina-ai/example-grafana-prometheus/blob/main/grafana-dashboards/flow.json) 
```

> You should see the following dashboard :

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You should see the following dashboard:
```

```{figure} ../../.github/2.0/grafana.png
:align: center
```

````{admonition} Hint
:class: hint

> You should query your Flow to fed the monitoring. Othewise the dashboard will look empty.

Reviewer 4: fed?
